{{Short description|1959 film by Jack Clayton}}
{{EngvarB|date=September 2013}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=May 2023}}

{{Infobox film
| name           = Room at the Top
| image          = Room at the Top poster 2.jpg

| caption        = Original British 1959 [[Film poster#Film poster sizes|quad size film poster]]
| director       = [[Jack Clayton]]
| producer       = [[John and James Woolf|John Woolf]]<br />[[John and James Woolf|James Woolf]]
| screenplay     = [[Neil Paterson (writer)|Neil Paterson]]
| based_on       = {{based on|''[[Room at the Top (novel)|Room at the Top]]''|[[John Braine]]}}
| starring       = {{ubl|[[Simone Signoret]]|[[Laurence Harvey]]|[[Heather Sears]]|[[Donald Wolfit]]|[[Donald Houston]]|[[Hermione Baddeley]]}}
| music          = [[Mario Nascimbene]]
| cinematography = [[Freddie Francis]]
| editing        = [[Ralph Kemplen]]
| studio         = [[Romulus Films]]
| distributor    = [[British Lion Films]]
| released       = {{film date|df=y|1959|01|22}}
| runtime        = 115 minutes
| country        = United Kingdom
| language       = English
| budget         = £280,000<ref>{{cite book|author=Alexander Walker|title=Hollywood, England|publisher=Stein and Day|date=1974|page=50}}</ref> or £231,387<ref>Sarah Street (2014) Film Finances and the British New Wave, Historical
Journal of Film, Radio and Television, 34:1, 23-42 p26, DOI: 10.1080/01439685.2014.879000</ref><ref name="money">Chapman, J. (2022). The Money Behind the Screen: A History of British Film Finance, 1945-1985. Edinburgh University Press p 359</ref>
| gross          = $2,400,000 (US)<ref>{{cite news|title=M-G-M CASHING IN ON OSCAR VICTORY: ' Ben-Hur' Gross Expected to Reach 7 Million by Week's End -- 'Spartacus' Booked|date=7 April 1960|work=The New York Times|page=44}}</ref>
}}

'''''Room at the Top''''' is a 1959 [[United Kingdom|British]] [[Drama (film and television)|drama]] film based on the 1957 [[Room at the Top (novel)|novel of the same name]] by [[John Braine]]. It was adapted by [[Neil Paterson (writer)|Neil Paterson]] (with uncredited work by [[Mordecai Richler]]), directed by [[Jack Clayton]] (his feature-length debut), and produced by [[John and James Woolf]]. The film stars [[Laurence Harvey]], [[Simone Signoret]], [[Heather Sears]], [[Donald Wolfit]], [[Donald Houston]], and [[Hermione Baddeley]].

The film was widely lauded, and it was nominated for six [[Academy Awards]], winning two: [[Academy Award for Best Actress|Best Actress]] (Signoret) and [[Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay|Best Adapted Screenplay]] (Paterson). Its other nominations at the [[32nd Academy Awards]] were for [[Academy Award for Best Picture|Best Picture]], [[Academy Award for Best Director|Best Director]] (Clayton), [[Academy Award for Best Actor|Best Actor]] (Harvey), and [[Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress|Best Supporting Actress]] (Baddeley).<ref>{{cite web |url=http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=947948187848 |title=Academy Awards Database: Room at the Top |website=awardsdatabase.oscars.org |publisher=Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences |access-date=8 October 2016 }}{{Dead link|date=November 2018 |bot=InternetArchiveBot |fix-attempted=yes }}</ref> Baddeley's performance, consisting of 2 minutes and 19 seconds of screen time, is the shortest ever to be nominated for an acting Oscar.<ref name="HB2min19">{{Cite web|url=https://www.screentimecentral.com/shortest-performances/ |title=Screen Time Central: Shortest Performances |access-date=24 July 2019|work=screentimecentral.com}}</ref>

==Plot==
Soon after the Second World War, in the [[West Riding of Yorkshire]], England, Joseph (Joe) Lampton, an ambitious young man, moves from his hometown, the dreary factory town of Dufton, to the somewhat larger town of Warnley to assume a secure but poorly paid and dead-end post in the Borough Treasurer's Department. Determined to get ahead, and ignoring the warnings of his colleague and flatmate Charlie Soames, he pursues Susan Brown, the daughter of a local industrial magnate. She has been dating wealthy Jack Wales but Joe is able to charm her. Mr and Mrs Brown attempt to frustrate Joe's social climbing by persuading Joe's boss to encourage him to pursue a woman of his own class; getting him a job offer back in Dufton, which he refuses when he discovers the machination; and sending Susan on a trip abroad, but Susan remains smitten.

While pursuing Susan, Joe continues to see Alice Aisgill, an unhappily married Frenchwoman ten years his senior who came to England as a teacher a decade earlier and married George Aisgill, a haughty and abusive upper-middle class Englishman who is now having numerous affairs. Joe thinks he is just killing time with Alice and Alice says they can just be "loving friends". Their feelings for each other begin to turn into something more and Joe starts to lose interest in his pursuit of Susan. The relationship is passionate, tempestuous and after a particularly heated argument, Joe switches his focus back to Susan. He manages to take her virginity but is unsatisfied and finds himself drawn back to Alice.

Joe and Alice go away on a short holiday and Alice is overjoyed that Joe seems to have decided to end his quest for wealth and social status in favour of simply being happy with himself and with her. They decide she will ask for a divorce when she gets home but when she does, George refuses and declares he will ruin Joe and Alice, both socially and financially, if their relationship continues. While Joe is brooding over this, Mr Brown delivers the news that Susan is pregnant and that he expects Joe to stop seeing Alice and marry Susan, in which case Joe can come to work for him at a generous salary.

Seeing no way around his obstacles to a relationship with Alice, Joe tells her that he is going to marry Susan. Heartbroken, Alice gets drunk in a pub and the next morning, while his co-workers are celebrating his engagement, Joe hears that she drove her car off a cliff to which she and he used to go together and died slowly over the course of several hours. Devastated, Joe leaves the office and wanders to the flat where he and Alice had their trysts but Alice's friend Elspeth, who owns the flat, drives him away by screaming at him and blaming him for Alice's death.

Joe goes to a pub on the waterfront, where a woman named Mavis comes on to him because he is well-dressed. Although he is very drunk and does not seem very interested in her (he calls her Alice), Joe keeps a man from taking Mavis away against her will. When Joe is alone, the man and some of his friends beat Joe unconscious. In the morning, Charlie finds Joe lying in the street with a battered face but Joe's only concern is his guilt over what he feels he led Alice to do.

A short time later, Joe and Susan get married. With a rich wife and high-paying job, he has got everything he thought he wanted. As they are driven away after the wedding, Susan's effusive praise of the ceremony is cut short when she notices that there are tears in Joe's eyes, which she misinterprets by saying "I believe you really are sentimental after all".

==Cast==
{{div col}}
* [[Simone Signoret]] as Alice Aisgill
* [[Laurence Harvey]] as Joe Lampton
* [[Heather Sears]] as Susan Brown
* [[Donald Wolfit]] as Mr Brown
* [[Donald Houston]] as Charlie Soames
* [[Hermione Baddeley]] as Elspeth
* [[Allan Cuthbertson]] as George Aisgill
* [[Raymond Huntley]] as Mr Hoylake
* [[John Westbrook (actor)|John Westbrook]] as Jack Wales
* [[Ambrosine Phillpotts]] as Mrs Brown
* [[Richard Pasco]] as Teddy Merrick
* [[Beatrice Varley]] as Joe's Aunt
* [[Delena Kidd]] as Eva
* [[Ian Hendry]] as Cyril
* [[April Olrich]] as Mavis
* [[Mary Peach]] as June Samson
* [[Anthony Newlands]] as Bernard
* [[Avril Elgar]] as Miss Gilchrist
* Thelma Ruby as Miss Breith
* [[Paul Whitsun-Jones]] as Laughing Man at Bar (who tells Joe a joke at the dance)
* [[Derren Nesbitt]] as Thug in Fight on Tow Path (Mavis's possessive boyfriend)
* [[Derek Benfield]] as Man in Bar (uncredited)
* [[Richard Caldicot]] as Taxi Driver (uncredited)
* [[Wendy Craig]] as Joan (uncredited)
* [[Basil Dignam]] as Priest (uncredited)
* [[Everley Gregg]] as Mayoress (uncredited)
* [[Jack Hedley]] as Architect (uncredited)
* [[Miriam Karlin]] as Gertrude (uncredited)
* [[Wilfrid Lawson (actor)|Wilfrid Lawson]] as Joe's Uncle Nat (uncredited)
* [[Prunella Scales]] as Council Office Worker (uncredited)
* [[Julian Somers]] as St Clair (uncredited)
* [[John Welsh (actor)|John Welsh]] as Mayor (uncredited)
{{div col end}}

==Adaptation==
There are some differences between Braine's novel and the film. For one, Joe's friend Charlie Soames is a friend from his hometown of Dufton in the novel, whereas, in the film, he meets Charlie in Warnley (which is called Warley in the book). Also, in the book, more is made of Joe's lodging at the Thompsons', which, in the novel, he arranged before his arrival in Warley (in the film, Charlie arranges it soon after they meet): it is through his association with the Thompsons that Joe is able to gain entry to a higher social circle than that to which he had previously had access, and Mrs Thompson's room is noted as being at "the top" of Warley geographically, which serves as a metaphor for Joe's social-climbing.

==Production==
Producer James Woolf bought the film rights to [[John Braine|Braine]]'s novel, originally intending to cast [[Stewart Granger]] as Joe and [[Jean Simmons]] as Susan. [[Vivien Leigh]] was originally offered the part of Alice.<ref>David Thomson ''Have You Seen'', London: Allen Lane; New York: Knopf, 2008, p.736</ref> Woolf hired [[Jack Clayton|Clayton]] as director after seeing ''[[The Bespoke Overcoat]]'',<ref>Alexander Walker, ''Hollywood, England'', Stein and Day, 1974 p51</ref> an [[29th Academy Awards|Academy Award-winning]] short film that was produced and distributed by companies founded by the [[John and James Woolf|Woolf brothers]].

===Shooting===
For the production, in addition to filming on sets at [[Shepperton Studios]] in [[Surrey]], there was extensive [[filming location|location]]-shooting in [[Halifax, West Yorkshire|Halifax]], [[Yorkshire]], which stood in for the fictional towns of Warnley and Dufton. Greystones, a large mansion in the [[Savile Park, Halifax|Savile Park]] area of Halifax, was used as the location for exterior scenes of the Brown family mansion; [[Halifax railway station (England)|Halifax railway station]] doubled as Warnley Station in the film; and [[Halifax Town Hall]] was used as the Warnley Town Hall. The wedding was filmed at All Souls church, Boothtown, Halifax. Some scenes were also filmed in [[Bradford]], notably the one in which Joe travels on a bus and spots Susan in a lingerie shop and those outside the amateur dramatics theatre.

Freddie Francis says John Woolf wanted to fire Francis during filming but Clayton refused.<ref name="francis">{{cite web|title=Interview with Freddie Francis|website=British Entertainment History Project|url=https://historyproject.org.uk/interview/freddie-francis|date=1993–1994}}</ref>

==Reception==
The film was critically acclaimed.<ref>{{cite magazine|title=British 'Room' Rousing $19,500 Sets London Pix Pace|magazine=[[Variety (magazine)|Variety]] |date=4 February 1959|page=13|url=http://www.archive.org/stream/variety213-1959-02#page/n12/mode/1up|access-date=4 July 2019|via=[[Internet Archive]]}}</ref> Reviewing the movie for [[The New York Times]], [[A.H. Weiler|Abraham Weiler]] praised Braine's novel, which he compared favourably to [[John Osborne]]'s ''[[Look Back in Anger]]'', and noted the depth of Harvey's, Signoret's, and Sears's portrayals, concluding that the movie "may be basically cheerless and somber, but it has a strikingly effective view."<ref name="Weiler">{{cite news|last=Weiler|first=A.H.|title= Screen: 'Room at Top'|date=March 31, 1959|url=https://www.nytimes.com/1959/03/31/archives/screen-room-at-top.html|work=[[The New York Times]]|access-date=17 September 2023}}</ref>

''Room at the Top'' marked the beginning of Jack Clayton's career as an important director. It was the third most popular film at the British box office in 1959 (after ''[[Carry On Nurse]]'' and ''[[Inn of the Sixth Happiness]]''),<ref>The Times, 1 January 1960, page 13: ''Year of Profitable British Films'' – The Times Digital Archive, accessed 11 July 2012</ref> grossing $700,000.<ref>{{cite magazine|magazine=[[Variety (magazine)|Variety]]|date=20 April 1960|page=47|title=Gag-Films Rule British Trade|url=http://www.archive.org/stream/variety218-1960-04#page/n200/mode/1up|via=[[Internet Archive]]}}</ref>

''Room at the Top'' is seen as the first of the [[British New Wave]] of [[Kitchen sink realism|kitchen-sink-realism]] film dramas.<ref>{{cite news|last1=Roberts|first1=Andrew|title=The film that changed British Cinema|url=https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/21/room-at-the-top-film|access-date=22 November 2016|work=The Guardian|date=21 June 2009}}</ref> It was followed by a sequel in 1965 titled ''[[Life at the Top (film)|Life at the Top]]''.

===Awards and nominations===
{| class="wikitable plainrowheaders"
|-
! Award
! Category
! Nominee(s)
! Result
! Ref.
|-
| rowspan="6"| [[32nd Academy Awards|Academy Awards]]
| [[Academy Award for Best Picture|Best Motion Picture]]
| [[John and James Woolf|John Woolf]] and [[John and James Woolf|James Woolf]]
| {{nom}}
| align="center" rowspan="6"| <ref>{{Cite web|url=http://www.oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/1960 |title=The 32nd Academy Awards (1960) Nominees and Winners |access-date=2011-08-21 |work=oscars.org |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110706094204/http://www.oscars.org/awards/academyawards/legacy/ceremony/32nd-winners.html |archive-date=6 July 2011 |url-status=live}}</ref>
|-
| [[Academy Award for Best Director|Best Director]]
| [[Jack Clayton]]
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[Academy Award for Best Actor|Best Actor]]
| [[Laurence Harvey]]
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[Academy Award for Best Actress|Best Actress]]
| [[Simone Signoret]]
| {{won}}
|-
| [[Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress|Best Supporting Actress]]
| [[Hermione Baddeley]]
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay|Best Screenplay – Based on Material from Another Medium]]
| [[Neil Paterson (writer)|Neil Paterson]]
| {{won}}
|-
| rowspan="7"| [[12th British Academy Film Awards|British Academy Film Awards]]
| colspan="2"| [[BAFTA Award for Best Film|Best Film from any Source]]
| {{won}}
| align="center" rowspan="7"| <ref>{{cite web |url=http://awards.bafta.org/award/1959/film |title=BAFTA Awards: Film in 1959 |website=[[BAFTA]] |year=1959 |access-date=16 September 2016 |ref={{harvid|BAFTA|1959}}}}</ref>
|-
| colspan="2"| [[BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Film|Best British Film]]
| {{won}}
|-
| rowspan="2"| [[BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role|Best British Actor]]
| Laurence Harvey
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[Donald Wolfit]]
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role|Best British Actress]]
| Hermione Baddeley
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role|Best Foreign Actress]]
| Simone Signoret
| {{won}}
|-
| [[BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles|Most Promising Newcomer to Film]]
| [[Mary Peach]]
| {{nom}}
|-
| rowspan="2"| [[1959 Cannes Film Festival|Cannes Film Festival]]
| [[Palme d'Or]]
| Jack Clayton
| {{nom}}
| align="center" rowspan="2"| <ref>{{Cite web|url=http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/archives/ficheFilm/id/3430/year/1959.html |title=Festival de Cannes: Room at the Top |access-date=15 February 2009|work=festival-cannes.com}}</ref>
|-
| [[Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress|Best Actress]]
| Simone Signoret
| {{won}}
|-
| rowspan="2"| [[17th Golden Globe Awards|Golden Globe Awards]]
| [[Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama|Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama]]
| Simone Signoret
| {{nom}}
| align="center" rowspan="2"| <ref>{{cite web|url=https://www.goldenglobes.com/film/room-top |title=Room at the Top – Golden Globes |website=[[HFPA]] |access-date=5 July 2021 |ref={{harvid|HFPA|1960}}}}</ref>
|-
| colspan="2"| Samuel Goldwyn Award
| {{won}}
|-
| [[Jussi Awards]]
| Best Foreign Actress
| rowspan="2"| Simone Signoret
| {{won}}
| align="center"| 
|-
| [[Laurel Awards]]
| Top Female Dramatic Performance
| {{nom}}
| align="center"| 
|-
| rowspan="2"| [[National Board of Review Awards 1959|National Board of Review Awards]]
| colspan="2"| [[National Board of Review: Top Five Foreign Language Films|Top Foreign Films]]
| {{draw|2nd Place}}
| align="center" rowspan="2"| <ref>{{cite web |url=https://nationalboardofreview.org/award-years/1959/ |title=1959 Award Winners |website=[[National Board of Review]] |access-date=5 July 2021}}</ref>
|-
| [[National Board of Review Award for Best Actress|Best Actress]]
| Simone Signoret
| {{won}}
|-
| rowspan="4"| [[1959 New York Film Critics Circle Awards|New York Film Critics Circle Awards]]
| colspan="2"| [[New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film|Best Film]]
| {{nom}}
| align="center" rowspan="4"| <ref>{{cite web|url=https://www.nyfcc.com/awards/?awardyear=1959 |title=1959 New York Film Critics Circle Awards |website=[[New York Film Critics Circle]] |access-date=5 July 2021}}</ref>
|-
| [[New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director|Best Director]]
| Jack Clayton
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor|Best Actor]]
| Laurence Harvey
| {{nom}}
|-
| [[New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress|Best Actress]]
| Simone Signoret
| {{nom}}
|}

==See also==
* ''[[Life at the Top (film)|Life at the Top]]'' – the 1965 sequel
* ''[[Man at the Top (TV series)|Man at the Top]]'' – a 1970 TV series featuring Joe Lampton in later life
* ''[[Room at the Top (2012 TV series)|Room at the Top]]'' – a 2012 two-part TV adaptation by BBC
* [[BFI Top 100 British films]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==External links==
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20160307052114/http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6b49f39e ''Room at the Top''] at the [[British Film Institute]]{{better source needed|reason=Help request: a live link can be searched for at https://collections-search.bfi.org.uk/web/search/expert - if available, replace the archive URL with the live link. Or if none found, remove this 'better source needed' template. | date=October 2023}}
* {{Screenonline title|440778}}
* {{IMDb title}}
* {{TCMDb title}}
* {{Rotten Tomatoes|room_at_the_top}}
* {{AllMovie title}}

{{Jack Clayton}}
{{Navboxes
|title= Awards for ''Room at the Top''
|list=
{{BAFTA Best Film}}
{{BAFTA Best British Film}}
}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Room at the Top}}
[[Category:1959 films]]
[[Category:British drama films]]
[[Category:Films featuring a Best Actress Academy Award-winning performance]]
[[Category:Films directed by Jack Clayton]]
[[Category:British black-and-white films]]
[[Category:Films set in Yorkshire]]
[[Category:Films based on British novels]]
[[Category:Films based on works by John Braine]]
[[Category:Films scored by Mario Nascimbene]]
[[Category:Films whose writer won the Best Adapted Screenplay Academy Award]]
[[Category:Films set in the 1940s]]
[[Category:Films about adultery in the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Best Film BAFTA Award winners]]
[[Category:Best British Film BAFTA Award winners]]
[[Category:Films about social realism]]
[[Category:1959 directorial debut films]]
[[Category:1950s English-language films]]
[[Category:1950s British films]]

